Naturally, since the main task for the rotor is behavior prediction,
the rotor, based on the requirements of the natural scientific description,
offers a formula that allows this behavior prediction to be built.
So, from the point of view of the rotor, behavior prediction is a potential.
The desire and the requirements that I set for myself.
And this potential of behavior is made up of expectations,
again, I set for myself, and those values and reinforcements that I have
from the point of view and with respect to social values.
If I know, measure, represent the expectations of a person,
if I know his attitude, his assessment, his representation,
the values chosen by him, then I can assess the potential that he can achieve.
Again, the idea is very simple.
Let's take a careerist.
At the moment when he is busy to achieve promotion,
he works overtime, he re-executes plans.
He is active, but he does it not to increase the company's performance,
not to take care of the company.
He has only one value, to be promoted.
His expectations are connected with his promotion.
If these expectations coincide with the value of the reinforcement,
then he gets a promotion, and here is the potential.
We can predict that he has achieved his goal.
If there is a discrepancy in expectations and values,
then the total amount may be insufficient,
and, in the end, the attitude to you as a careerist
may be the reason for not promoting you to the management position.
You have already quarreled with the team,
so you will scold everyone if you are still in power.
Here is the potential of his behavior.
And, knowing the expectations, values and reinforcement,
I can make predictions.
It is not necessary that my prediction will be fulfilled.
Will it be fulfilled or not,
I will see it in my experience and practice.
If it will not be fulfilled, then I made a mistake somewhere.
I am given a formula that can serve as a prognostic interest.
This is what concerns the theory of social learning of Rotor.
But Rotor is not a data-driven company.
The advantage of biheorists is that they are operational.
They do not build theories that can be tested,
argued and written in dissertations.
They build an experiment that can be carried out
and it will give an answer whether you are right or not.
If we talk about social prognosis,
then, of course, there are some motives that move a person towards a goal.
There are some motives that he wants to satisfy.
In this case, Rotor introduces the concept of necessity.
It has long been seen in psychology, but not in biheorism.
Biheorists did not need necessity,
because necessity was in the inner characteristics.
This is for cognitivists, this is for general psychologists.
Rotor introduces a biheoristic, a biheral understanding of necessity.
Necessity as specific goals that I need to achieve.
These are the same expectations that I strive for from the previous formula.
But again, it is not enough to introduce.
We need to give a way to measure these needs,
understood as specific goals that I strive for.
Rotor solves this problem by introducing six main criteria
that characterize human needs.
Moreover, these criteria characterize these needs
from the point of view of a person's behavior prognosis.
For Rotor, the main task is prognosis.
What a person will do, how he will behave.
But in order to answer the question, how,
I need to know why and what points he does.
As for these categories, the first category is the status of recognition.
A person is a social being.
If I try to achieve a certain position, a certain social niche,
it is determined by the social hierarchy that is created by the society.
This is the social recognition theory of Rotor.
Accordingly, this niche has a certain status.
One thing is to be a janitor, another thing is to be a president.
The third thing is to be a general director.
The fourth thing is to be a project manager, and so on.
There are certain statuses.
Depending on what status you are,
depending on what status you strive for,
it depends on your expectations.
You can strive to be the senior assistant of the second junior janitor.
This is your status.
This is the level of achievements that you have set for yourself.
This is your reputation.
The status of a teacher, doctor, lawyer, economist, teacher, businessman is different.
Every social role has its own social status.
When you choose a certain role, you set a bar for yourself.
A bar is the level of your expectations.
The higher the status of recognition, the higher the level of your expectations.
But, naturally, we live in a social world, as Rotor claims.
Unfortunately, not everything depends on me.
Yes, a person has an activity.
Rotor does not argue with Bandura.
Rotor and Bandura are representatives of the cognitive-behavioral direction,
and a person is active for them.
Here they are divided into radical behaviorism.
But the problem is that a person understands
that other people claim the same niche in the social ladder.
There are many of them.
Consequently, there is a certain struggle,
the outcome of which is not clear.
Therefore, you need to have some protection.
Protection for yourself,
because not everyone will be able to become a janitor, if desired.
In this regard, I must have some protection for my inner variables,
for my activity,
which will allow me to maintain my self-esteem
in case of not achieving the desired status.
To maintain the very effectiveness that Bandura talks about.
Rotor understands perfectly well that if a person's self-esteem drops,
his inner variables are under threat,
and they begin to depend on external stimuli.
We move from the new formula of stimulus of the inner variable reaction
to the old one, stimulus of the reaction.
Inner variables are devalued.
Why should I deal with them if I still can't achieve anything?
A person again becomes dependent on the external world.
From the point of view of the rotor,
a person must find his place in this world
depending on the conditions that surround him.
In this regard, the next category that he highlights is the category of domination.
People have different expectations.
Someone wants to rise to have power.
It doesn't matter why, it doesn't matter why.
I have an expectation that I must be above someone,
that is, someone must be in my power.
If I can't dominate, then I am in someone's power.
And, accordingly, the level of my pressures falls.
I begin to justify myself.
Why do I need extra responsibility?
Why do I need headaches and so on?
I think this is more than justified to maintain one's self-esteem.
Therefore, domination is an important criterion that determines the power of a person's activity.
Strong domination, I will go on headaches.
Weak domination, they wouldn't touch me.
The rules of the tram.
The fourth indicator is independence.
Naturally, all these indicators are interconnected.
The schemes proposed by Skinner, Bandura, Rotter,
are autonomous indicators that exist independently of each other.
All these indicators are interconnected.
This is a system, which is very good, which is very important in Bichiarism.
They create autonomy, they create a system of parameters.
And this is the criterion that is included in the methodology of Bichiarism.
Independence.
Am I ready to take responsibility for my reaction, for my behavior,
for processing my internal variables of these external requirements?
The manager works in the company, he receives the task,
and then he, at his own risk, comes up with different ways to solve it.
He can solve everything and get a promotion, a bonus, a promotion.
He may not take something into account, not fulfill the plan,
receive a fine, dismissal, punishment.
So, independence is, in fact, the degree of responsibility.
How much responsibility can I take?
The more domination, the more responsibility I am ready to take.
The more responsibility I take, the higher the status I claim.
The more responsibility I take, the more dependent I am on circumstances,
because I am responsible for too many points.
The next criterion is, again, for Bichiarism, an unacceptable one.
Love and attachment.
How can you measure love and attachment?
The situation is very simple.
How many people love you?
How many people do you love?
Love is understood here as a measure of trust.
How many people can rely on you?
Love and attachment.
In fact, in this case, we are talking about friends,
about those with whom you have a cooperative relationship,
where the relationship is not a one-on-one,
but a relationship where there is a problem,
I will help you solve it, and I will not take anything from you now.
At the same time, I know that if I have difficulties, you will help me.
For Bichiarism, this is a completely subjective indicator.
But Rotor again introduces love and attachment,
albeit in such a formalized form,
but it is trying to describe a living, functioning,
everyday person existing in the world around us.
And perhaps the most indisputable criterion,
but at the same time difficult to measure, is physical comfort.
We all strive for physical comfort,
but for some people comfort is a dacha in Hawaii,
for others comfort is to get into a corner and just sleep.
For some people comfort is to be brought to the plane,
for another person to fly,
for others comfort is to be left alone,
so that you can relax on the computer.
In this case, physical comfort is measured from the point of view of a person's satisfaction.
Physical, material, tangible stimuli that you have.
And in this regard, this is a Bichiarist approach,
because it is determined by your expectations, your goals,
your independence, your domination, your status of recognition.
It is not necessary that there are direct or inverse proportional connections.
The problem is that a person, as an active being,
can list the necessary conditions for his comfort.
Here, of course, the food, warmth, clothing,
what is called vital needs, if we take, for example, Maslow,
but this is a broader concept.
There are necessities that are necessary for your existence.
And there are conditions of well-being that make your life more satisfying.
In addition to the fact that Rotor considers these six categories of needs,
he understands that the need is a very broad concept.
And in this regard, if I want to operationalize this concept,
to make it measurable, I must introduce some other measurable coefficients.
Therefore, he divides the needs into three components.
In addition to the six categories that we just talked about,
he divides all the needs of a person into three components.
The first component is the potential of need.
That is, the results that I want to achieve.
The need is why I behave this way.
The potential is why I set these tasks for myself.
Again, I can set myself a problem of physical comfort
in terms of potential of need, like a summer cottage, a car, a plane, a yacht,
a vacation in Courchevel, and so on.
I can set myself a problem of physical comfort,
like going to a wilderness, not even to a village, but to the woods,
so that no one is there, and to be alone for a week,
without phones, without computers, just you and nature,
and so that there are no people around.
Again, each person sets the potential of his needs.
Moreover, the potential of this need depends on the social environment,
on the tasks that arise in society.
If I have something superfluous, I am ready to get rid of it,
even with the loss of the usual physical comfort.
In addition to the potential of need, Rotor also introduces the value of need.
Look, again, the value.
It has already been in the theory of social learning as the value of reinforcement.
The value in this case again reflects the subjectivity.
It is an assessment of the need that I want to achieve.
And the assessment of others, my social environment of this need.
For example, I can invest all my money to buy a work of art.
At the same time, for example, my country house burned down,
my wife left, I am not interested in that.
I invest all my money in a work of art, so that it is hanging on the wall, and so on.
And everything else is secondary.
I have set my values and needs.
They can be socially acceptable or socially unacceptable.
This is the second question.
The activity comes from a person,
and I subjectively set the desires and needs that I have.
And the third component, again, is very interesting.
All these three components, potential of need, value of need,
they are aimed at revealing the subjectivity of a person.
Subjectivity is like those internal variables that he has.
So, the next component is the freedom of activity and minimally set goals.
In fact, this component reflects the situation that,
being a social being, a person is not free in his actions.
If we walk down the street and see that McDonald's is selling hamburgers,
and we are hungry, we want to eat, we are happy to eat hamburgers,
but suddenly it is discovered that we have no money with us,
and we have a card that is not served in McDonald's,
then our freedom is limited.
Here is a hamburger, but you cannot take it,
because there are certain social requirements,
that you can buy it, and you can buy it for money,
but you don't have it now.
And it turns out that, although you can take one step to satisfy your needs,
you cannot do it, simply because you don't have the necessary components
to achieve this step.
In this regard, when Rotter talks about freedom of activity,
he introduces the concept of minimal goal.
In fact, we have already talked about this.
Each person sets his own level of commitments,
and in this regard there are high, lofty, ideal goals,
which I want to achieve,
but there are those minimal goals that I have to achieve.
I may want to be the general director,
but it didn't work out, it doesn't matter why.
Is it my fault, or the circumstances?
But my minimal goal is to become the head of the department.
Yes, even if I didn't go to the company at 30,
but still I became the head.
Yes, it didn't work out to become the general director,
I will find an excuse, and, accordingly, I will reduce the value,
I will change the efficiency,
but if the minimal goal is not achieved,
then it is a collapse of the human efficiency,
and, accordingly, in this situation,
there is a need to achieve this goal in one way or another.
My freedom is limited by other people,
but other people present an opportunity to achieve at least one goal.
If I don't achieve this goal,
even if I don't become the head of the department,
if I don't achieve the minimal goal,
then I will become a despot in the family.
Even if my wife suffers,
I will have children,
I will quarrel with my mother-in-law,
I somehow managed to imitate the fact that I became the head.
Nobody in my family wants to talk to me,
they don't want to contact me.
But I achieved that goal for myself,
I gave it an assessment,
and my efficiency was saved by the assessment along with it.
In this regard,
the Rotor, after introducing categories and three components of the needs,
clarifies its original formula of behavior prognosis,
and before it, I remind you,
there is a task in the theory of social decision-making to build a behavior prognosis.
It now says that if earlier the potential of behavior was in the sum of expectations and values of reinforcement,
now I introduce new components
that allow me to reduce the breakdown of concepts
and simplify the measurement procedure.
Now it considers that the general formula of the needs prognosis
is that the potential of the needs is equal to the sum of the freedom of activity and the value of the needs.
Look, earlier the formula was expectations plus the value of reinforcement.
A wide breakdown of information,
based on the four variables previously introduced by the Rotor.
Now, after adding six more categories of needs to these four variables,
plus three components of the needs,
it introduces the concept of freedom of activity as
freedom of activity is my activity,
but my activity is limited by the social environment that exists.
There are not many local social ladders,
there are a lot of applicants.
All this limits my freedom,
but in addition to this, there is my inner expectation,
inner assessment of the values that I give to the needs.
Therefore, if I want to better understand the potential of my needs,
what I want to achieve and why I want to achieve it,
I must start from the component of freedom of activity
and from the category of the value of the needs.
This is what concerns the potential of the needs.
And from the point of view of the Rotor,
based on this formula, I can already assess the potential of the needs.
It should be noted that the measurements conducted
by the Rotor showed that if we use the scales developed by the Rotor,
we can build, let's say,
much better forecasts than other psychological theories
or theories related to the organizational behavior that we are engaged in.
Of course, they do not give us a definite result,
but compared to other approaches,
this approach really agrees with the practice,
and it is especially good in the analysis of business behavior,
the behavior of people in the organization,
organizational activity of a person.
But still, perhaps, the most famous achievement of the Rotor
is not so much the theory of social learning,
which is well known by specialists who often use it,
not so much its theory of needs,
which, again, is known by specialists who use it,
who use it, who use it,
and so various explanatory schemes are built.
The Rotor is widely known as a person who has the concept of the locus of control.
As for the locus of control,
it is another characteristic of the needs that a person has.
It is a generalized expectation.
Remember the expectation as a variable
with which we analyze social interaction.
The locus of control is a generalized expectation
of the extent to which people are able to control and reinforce their lives.
A person is an active being,
and a person builds on the basis of the operative reinforcement of the skinner.
A person builds his behavior from the point of view of the analysis of the consequences that arise here.
The Rotor introduces the category of the locus of control,
and it introduces it precisely so that it is possible to measure expectations.
It creates a questionnaire on the locus of control
and, accordingly, its task is to measure such a subjective thing as expectations.
And it succeeds.
From the point of view of the Rotor,
which has conducted a large number of experiments,
conducted a factor analysis of its data,
it turned out that the whole large community of people
with their abundance of internal variables,
immersed in the abundance of external stimuli,
can be divided into two categories.
These are externals and internals.
Again, as for the Rotor,
its concept of locus of control
is very much in line with the concept of Jung's introverts-extroverts.
However, if for Jung, from the point of view of behaviorists,
these are very poorly measurable concepts,
then instead of these concepts, introverts-extroverts,
the Rotor will be measurable from the point of view of behaviorism,
the concept of externals and internals.
An external is a person who assumes
that the control over his reaction, behavior, and expectations lies outside.
External stimuli are dominant from the point of view of determining any achievements,
and little depends on a person.
External is a typical object of Skinner's study.
A person who has abandoned internal activity,
is under the influence of external stimuli.
Internals are quite the opposite.
Internals are those people whose locus of control is inside them.
They are those people who pay a lot of attention to their internal variables.
All external stimuli that act on them are analyzed, processed by internal variables,
and go through an internal cognitive map.
Only after this analysis,
only after the analysis of possible consequences of different behavioral variants,
only in this case,
the variant that suits a person is chosen.
If externals are the people by external circumstances,
then internals are the people by their cognitive circumstances.
As for the concept of locus of control,
it had a significant impact on the whole cognitive-behavioral direction,
because it allowed to build a scale of expectations,
with pluses of external and internal.
Again, we should pay attention to the fact that there are no pure externals.
If a person is mentally healthy, then there are no pure externals and pure internals.
There are no people who are in the locus of control.
Someone is completely dependent on external circumstances,
someone makes decisions on their own.
Even if we take a newborn child,
who seems to be completely dependent on external influence,
he still quickly forms his needs, his interests, his desires.
He smiles to someone, he cries to someone.
Thus, he starts to let all these external factors through the inner world.
And he achieves the desired reaction in normal situations by this crying.
Again, there are no pure externals,
because no mentally healthy person will be immersed in his own thinking.
Just because if you have an 8-hour working day,
and you come and start to think about what you should do at work today,
you will think for a day, two, three.
Then you will be asked, what did you do in the past week?
And then you will have the following conclusions.
People are on this scale.
They are closer to the external end, closer to the internal end.
They have priority behaviors, priority ways of reacting.
And as for these priority behaviors and reactions,
they determine our behavior, our expectations,
they determine our dominance, our status,
they determine the value of our support,
and they make possible the prediction of the potential of our behavior.
This is what concerns the cognitive-behavioral approach
and the direction that was developed by Rotor.
These are the main directions that exist in the theory of learning from the behavioral point of view.
But we see that starting from radical behaviorism,
from the stimulus reaction,
gradually the same behaviorism more and more
takes into account the internal qualities,
the internal properties, the internal needs of a person.
Motives, needs.
It doesn't matter that behaviorists formulate them in an unusual psychological way.
Moreover, they formulate them in a way that there is an opportunity to measure the corresponding results.
But behaviorists, solving the original task of explanation, analysis, measurement,
control of human behavior,
come to the conclusion that if we want to solve the task of prediction of human behavior,
we must take into account the internal variables,
that is, the internal world of a person.
And, of course, reality itself leads them to the recognition of the human mental activity.
But as for the mental activity of a person,
which they left from initially,
because Otson, creating behaviorism,
was principally distancing himself from the psyche until scientists themselves understood it.
Well, if they didn't understand it, we will study behavior.
About 50 years after the emergence of behaviorism,
behaviorism, in fact, came close to the cognitive direction,
which is associated with the ideas of how a person lives, how a person thinks.
As for the cognitive approach,
the representatives of this direction come from one simple thing.
Yes, behaviorists, moreover, as well as any other cognitiveist,
psychologist, they are in solidarity with behaviorists in terms of measurability,
in terms of experimentality.
But the representatives of the cognitive direction come from the fact that
the unconditional difference between a person and all other animals
is that a person possesses a wide range of developed cognitive abilities.
A person is capable of thinking, a person is capable of thinking,
a person is capable of solving abstract problems.
The same animals can solve problems,
and monkeys, dogs, rats, mice,
they also solve the problem of finding food,
they can solve the problem of saving and moving according to their norms.
But as for a person, unlike all other, in any case,
currently known animals,
only a person has a cognitive structure,
with which a person is able to transmit his inner feelings,
his vision of the world, his perception of the world to another person.
A person has speech, he has a notion.
Due to the existence of this cognitive structure,
a person is able to think, to know the world,
and to know this world is considerably deeper than a person needs for his survival.
Indeed, what concerns the knowledge of the world,
which was inherent in our ancestors 50-100 thousand years ago,
it was more than enough for them to survive,
simply because, since we exist, this proves it.
A person is perfectly able to provide conditions for his existence,
survival, and from this point of view,
he is adequately adapted to reality.
But as for a person,
his thinking has spread to those spheres of reality,
which are not directly connected with his survival.
Let's take the universe, let's take the micro-world.
Of course, this can be interesting.
But not everyone understands the laws of quantum mechanics in the micro-world,
and the laws of quantum mechanics in the mega-world,
the theory of relativity.
But, for the duration of our lives, 50, 70, 100, 150 years,
none of us will fall into the micro-world,
none of us will be in other universes.
This is an excess of knowledge.
But a person is engaged in this knowledge,
a person devotes time to this knowledge,
this knowledge is socially demanded.
Why is it needed?
And the cognitivists set and solve this problem.
A person has thinking, a person has cognitive mechanisms.
And since they exist, they are needed for some reason.
Nature is very simple.
All excess qualities and properties that are not used,
are taken away and disappear.
If the thinking of a person has not disappeared,
and it is pleasant to realize and it is believed that it is increasing and deepening,
although this is a controversial question,
then, accordingly, let's start from the fact that
cognition, cognitive properties, cognitive functions
are a significant characteristic necessary for the survival and adaptation of a person.
And this is the basic idea of the cognitive approach.
As for the cognitive approach,
from this point of view, it pays principal attention to education and learning.
From the point of view of the cognitivists,
a person is, in fact, a researcher,
striving to understand and interpret what is happening to him in the world,
what is happening in the world that surrounds him.
And this is not to write a dissertation,
to make any discovery,
but to understand what is happening in the world from the point of view of prediction.
What dangers may exist in this world?
What problems may exist in this world?
What conditions may exist in this world?
In this regard,
a person is considered as an ordinary scientist, an ordinary researcher.
If I find myself in a new environment for myself,
I must study it.
Let's recall those situations when we find ourselves in some new room,
in a new room, in a new group, when we come to a new job.
Where do we start?
We start by getting acquainted,
learning about the rules,
finding out what is approved and what is not.
We explore a new environment of our stay.
If we come to work, we will work there for some time,
and, accordingly, we will work not alone, but with other people.
We need to know the rules and norms that exist there.
We need to know and be able to interpret the forms of behavior that exist there
in order to be properly understood.
And if, for example, someone made a mistake,
and this was made known to the management,
it is not a trick.
It is just a normal norm of attitude in this company,
because this or that mistake can have a significant impact
on the final results that will be achieved in this company.
So, a person is a researcher.
And if a person is a researcher,
all his actions, all his behavior is primarily related to acquiring new knowledge,
acquiring new information.
Knowledge from the point of view of fundamental physics or mathematics,
knowledge in the environment where I live,
where I am, knowledge in the environment where I am.
The most prominent figure of the cognitive approach,
in fact, one of his chiefs,
was George Alexander Kelly.
As for Kelly,
the main idea is what is the cognitive ability of a person.
The cognitive ability of a person is an organization of a cycle
of orientation in the world around,
the choice of possible behavior options,
and, finally, the execution of one or another option.
So, orientation, choice, execution.
Again, in a significant way,
this is intersected with the cognitive behavioral approach,
when we talk about internal changes,
with the bandura and the rotor, with its social environment.
But if behavioralists came from external stimuli
and internal stimuli, internal changes,
then Kelly is basically based on the fact
that a person has the ability to learn.
A person is a researcher, a person learns all his life.
And he learns neither at school, nor in the family, nor in kindergarten.
This is one of the forms of learning.
Whatever a person encounters, it is a learning.
Because he must be oriented in the environment
where he is.
A new place, a new house, a new car,
a new way of moving, skates, rollerskates, something else.
I must be oriented in what it is.
I must understand what dangers there may be,
what are the advantages, what are the disadvantages.
I must get a certain choice of options,
a choice of options I need to implement those or other actions.
And after I know these options,
after I get oriented in them,
I implement some option, I do something.
And then I look, whether it was successful or not.
Did I achieve what I wanted? No.
But if behavioralists had consequences of behavior
as the main result of solving this problem,
stimulus, internal change reaction,
then the principle of Kili is different.
Each person has some constructs in his head,
some conceptual, verbal schemes
with which a person describes the world.
And a person is not Skinner's rat.
Skinner liked to do experiments with rats.
We talked about it.
In the sense that he works with his trial and error.
He pressed the key, the food fell, I will press further.
He stumbled somewhere, got under tension,
I will not come to this place in the cage anymore.
A person does not work according to the method of trial and error.
A person is not so primitive to fill himself with bumps.
A person works from the point of view of the picture of the world in his head.
From the point of view of the knowledge he received,
seeing what happened to others,
what they did, what they didn't do.
And then, after I am in the head,
not in practice, as Bandura,
from the point of view of modeling,
not Rotter, from the point of view of social learning,
but in the head, guided by his inner criteria,
his cognitive, cognitive, his experience.
Here, we can easily use all our favorite psychological terms.
So, based on my inner criteria,
based on my experience, my memory,
only based on them, I already interpret what is happening in the world,
I already choose how I will behave in this or that situation.
A person is a thinker who thinks how to behave,
and then he gains experience.
A person is not a rat that behaves,
and then he considers the loss of his body.
So, this is the basic idea of the cognitive approach,
which, of course, Kelly finds its expression in more specific sentences.
Now we will consider these sentences.
In fact, all the cognitive theories of George Alexander Kelly
are the theory of building, education,
the theory of learning and development of a person in general.
Kelly comes from the idea of constructive alternativeism.
With the help of personal constructs,
a person describes reality.
A personal construct is a set of terms
with which I create a picture of the world.
A personal construct is built on the principle of similarity and difference.
It is dichotomous, double.
At the same time, Kelly comes from the idea that each person has his own personal constructs,
his own interpretations, his own approaches.
But with the help of these constructs, a person interprets the surrounding world.
The world in which he lives, where other people live,
where all these interactions take place.
But each person has his own interpretation, because the constructs are his own.
And in this connection, a constructive alternativeism arises,
freedom of choice.
I draw the world for myself as I see it.
And then, if I want to exchange my view of the world with another,
I can do it because we use the same terms, the same concepts.
We give them different meanings.
If we compare what the elements of the world look like,
what are their differences, we can come to the understanding
that each person has his own personal constructs.
But because people describe the same world,
because people speak the same language,
they are able to come to understand each other.
However, in order to achieve this understanding,
people have to go through a learning process.
They have to learn in the same culture,
they have to learn by the same construct,
they have to speak the same language, the same cognitive language.
At the same time, as with the Rotor,
from the point of view of the cell, why do we need all these constructs?
Why do we need a cognitive map?
Why do we need knowledge?
We need all this in order to be able to predict
what will happen in this world, what will happen in this world,
and how to avoid negative consequences,
to increase and expand what interests me.
As for the Kelly theory,
it has one main postulate and 11 consequences.
The main postulate of Kelly is very simple.
Kelly states that human activity,
activity, thinking,
since Kelly refers to cognitivists,
he perceives activity not only as behavior,
but also as an internal mental activity,
the consequence of which is behavior.
From the point of view of Kelly,
human activity is determined,
guided by the ways in which he predicts events.
It's a simple thought.
Any person, researcher,
subjective scientist, ordinary scientist,
why does he study this world?
He studies this world in order to make it predictable.
Only in that world I feel comfortable,
only in that world I feel calm,
where I know what to expect,
where I know what problems may occur,
what circumstances may arise,
where I know what's behind the corner,
where I know that no one will attack me from behind.
That's a simple thought.
And really, judge for yourself,
I don't think this postulate will cause a lot of disputes.
We feel calm in the usual environment.
Why?
Because we know everything there.
We may not like it,
we may not be satisfied,
but we feel calm there,
because we know where, who, what, where to expect what.
If a person finds himself in a new situation,
there's no need to necessarily go to an extreme situation.
A person went to the subway station,
where he had never been before.
And suddenly he decided to buy a pie or something else in a kiosk.
Something he hadn't done before.
Naturally, a person already has certain expectations.
What can be waiting for him?
That the pie may not be fried,
that there may be a confection,
that these pies are made from a dog, and so on.
That is, he is already...
After all, a person is not Robinson.
He lives in this world, in this social environment.
And naturally, living in this environment,
he is interested in making himself comfortable in this environment.
He will be comfortable only if he has information
about what is waiting for him in this world.
That is, what events are happening here,
and can predict what will happen in a while.
Based on this postulate,
Kelly emphasizes once again,
and this is the result of this main postulate,
that the existence of a person is, first of all,
a cognitive, that is, a cognitive process.
Any behavior of a person, any action, any approach,
is a learning.
If we are in a familiar environment,
where it becomes boring,
we have a reason for development.
What will happen if something changes?
For example, one lamp went out today,
tomorrow it will be the second, the third.
How many lamps can remain
to be able to work?
Accordingly, a person begins to learn the world,
to create an environment of learning,
even in the conditions when there is nothing to learn.
And this is a normal adaptive mechanism.
It is better to predict than to be unprepared
for the changes that will happen.
Kelly assumes that the learning of the world around him
is happening in the process of modeling this world.
And modeling in the broadest sense of the word.
This is not the modeling that Bandura has.
When there is a model,
and we try to learn,
to achieve the same results as this model.
Under the modeling, Kelly understands
the construction of a cognitive map of the whole world.
This is the modeling of another person.
This is the construction of predictions
about what will happen in this world.
This is the reflection on what I want to achieve,
why I need it,
whether it is worth working for me,
where and how to work, what to do.
In fact, this is a selection of different alternative options.
The more alternative options I have selected,
the more opportunities I can choose.
The more I have a choice,
the more opportunities I have to predict
what I have not yet encountered.
This is why the Kelly cognitive mechanisms are needed.
It should be said that the personal constructs
that are in a person's head
are not autonomous elements.
What we were talking about
when we were considering the construction
of cognitive-behavioral theories,
that everything is tied to the system,
finds its bright embodiment in Kelly.
All personal constructs are tied to each other.
Of course, if we understand business well,
then the corresponding information
is quickly associated with the existing information,
compared to what we know,
and analyzed as what is new in this information.
In this case, it turns out that we acquire knowledge
that is built into the existing system.
In this regard, if we encounter
absolutely new knowledge,
then it is very difficult to find its place in what we know.
This is a very important task.
Why, for example, with age,
it becomes harder and harder to learn?
The fact is that the more we live,
the more experience we gain.
Therefore, when we learn something new,
there is a need to associate it with what we already know.
We are constantly trying to find the connection between elements.
This is where conservatism comes from,
rigidity comes from,
creativity comes from.
It all depends on how we treat our cognitive map.
Do we consider it given and true,
because it has helped me for 40 years
and there has been no cut,
or am I always ready to change it
because I know that the world is constantly changing
and I need to be ready for this change?
We cannot impose a rigid scheme on the world.
Again, Kelly comes from the fact
that the result of interacting with the world
is the formation of one's own cognitive network.
The goal of interacting with the world
is to build a cognitive map of this world,
that is, to learn about this world.
The more I learn about this world,
the more I become connected to personal constructs,
the more I have connections between them,
and the more changes I am ready to consider.
Kelly emphasizes that all personal constructs
are hypotheses,
hypotheses of the person who owns them.
It makes no sense to ask what constructs are correct.
If these constructs are able to adapt a person
to the surrounding reality,
make him successful in it,
achieve the goals that are before him,
then his constructs are true for him
and useful for him.
It doesn't mean that the same constructs
should be in another person's hands.
If he adapts these constructs,
it doesn't mean that he will interpret reality
in the same way as the original person,
do the same actions,
make the same mistakes,
and achieve the same goals.
There is a lesson in life.
The more the constructs are formed,
the more opportunities for representation we have.
Let's sum up.
We have discussed the questions
related to individual learning,
analyzed the behavioral,
cognitive-behavioral and cognitive approaches,
analyzed the social theory of learning of the rotor,
and the theory of the system.
These are the main directions
that are useful for the application
of the concept in business processes,
business activities,
and business functioning.
Let's try to see
how clear it is,
how useful it is,
and how useful it is
to apply the knowledge we have now.
Now you will be offered a number of tasks
that will form a certain problem.
And then, during the discussion,
you will try to give your answer
to how you would, from your point of view,
solve the situation you are offered,
and how you would solve the problem
that you are offered.
Let's start.
We have still paid special attention
to individual learning
and considered different approaches
that are in some way
oriented to the development,
formation of learning of one person,
of one individual.
Naturally, this is the task
that is very often solved
and is the most relevant,
because usually,
there is always a teacher,
there is a listener,
and it is very important
to pass on the knowledge to the listener
and then check how he has learned it,
what skills he has developed.
In principle, of course,
we are primarily interested
in individual learning,
because people learn
so that they change their views
But if we only consider
individual learning,
we will again miss a very important circumstance.
When it comes to organization,
of course, you can send different employees
to different educational centers,
to different providers,
to different teachers,
and, accordingly, conduct individual learning
This is a rather expensive approach.
You can change the situation.
You can not send the organization's employees
to learn, but, on the contrary,
invite the teacher,
invite the desired specialist
to the organization itself
and organize a targeted process
of teaching most of the people
who are involved in the organization.
If earlier the primary focus
and primary task of business learning
was still individual learning,
it is not for nothing that we have been
considering and doing different approaches for so long,
they simply reflect the tradition of learning.
Then, somewhere starting from the middle of the 20th century,
the orientation is gradually changing.
Now we are talking about organizational learning.
This is our next topic
that we will discuss today.
Organizational learning aims to
improve the competence of the organization's employees
in order to better solve the tasks
that are before the organization,
to better implement the tasks
that are in front of the organization,
to better implement the mission of the organization,
to find other niches on the market
in terms of the promotion of goods
and services that exist in this organization.
We have discussed the advantages
and disadvantages of this learning.
What can we say about organizational learning?
What are the advantages and disadvantages?
Why is the concept of organizational learning
gaining more and more authority
and more and more organizations?
It is not just inviting coaches
and specialists to work with its employees,
but it is also organizing
whole corporate universities
that are already an integral part of the work with the staff
and an integral function of the Department of Education and Development.
The purpose of the task is to improve the quality of the organization,
to improve the quality of the organization,
and to organize a system of continuous education
of the organization's employees.
How to train new employees?
The situation is clear.
If a new employee comes,
I need to introduce him
to the organizational work culture,
teach him the skills, principles,
standards, corporate behavior trends
that exist in the organization.
But in addition to training new employees,
the task is often to train experienced employees,
to train managers of both middle and top levels.
Why is this necessary?
The fact is that a good business organization
is an organization that never stops
at the level it has reached
and leaves its goal
and invests in further development.
We have achieved certain successes in our niche.
We can even be without competitors
and be clear leaders,
but business is such a thin structure
that if you stop in your development
and get drunk on your success,
it only means that soon
there will be a problem of stagnation
and you will lose your position
and the organization will have
an unenviable end.
In this regard, it is worth noting
that the development of an organization
involves first of all
relying on existing conditions.
This means that the organization
relies on the support of existing employees.
These are people who are the bearers of ideas,
knowledge, missions, loyalty,
culture, and corporate spirit.
These are people who have worked
in this organization for a long time.
These are people who know
either other difficulties, successes, achievements,
or other ways to compensate for the problems
and, accordingly, these are the people
we can form a staff reserve.
These are the people who can work
as mentors of new managers,
new specialists.
These are the people who are the guides
and bearers of corporate history.
After all, every company is proud
of the history it has.
The company without history
is not a company.
In this regard, organizational training
has two functions.
On the one hand, it solves purely educational tasks,
teaching, forming the missing skills,
sharpening, developing the skills
that are present.
On the other hand, organizational training
is a way of uniting,
developing, and further changes
in the organization that exists.
It is a way of carrying out missions
to other employees of the organization,
exchanging opinions, and analyzing the situation.
It is a way of building communication
and interaction with subsequent motivation,
with subsequent assessment of employees
and the tasks that the organization has.
It is a way of showing the relationship
with the employee that the organization
is interested in the people who work there,
and the organization is ready to provide them
with conditions for further development.
When we talked about individual training,
we considered the main criteria of individual training.
Let's do the same from the point of view
of organizational training.
The difference is that if individual training
is a traditional problem that has existed
for more than a decade,
then organizational training is a new approach
that has developed and is getting
more and more widespread in organizations.
Accordingly, the problems, tasks,
and criteria that arise from the point of view
of the coverage of a particular problem
are even more controversial than the criteria
that we talked about in the case of individual training.
However, our task is to get a basic idea
of the advantages and the underlying
elements of organizational training,
because organizational training is a huge investment.
First, it is a means of organization,
and secondly, it is a time-consuming process.
The fact is that organizational training
is not the kind of training that is carried out
with a three-time production.
In fact, it includes a week or two months,
and most of the employees,
and the leading employees,
are disconnected from the direct activity.
And again, the same dilemma arises.
Where is this golden mean?
What should be the duration of this training?
What should be the return of this training?
What should be the investment in this training?
If I have now disconnected my employees
from their direct activity for a month,
how quickly will I, first of all,
recover the lost benefit that they did not receive,
and secondly, what additional profit
will it give me in order to pay off my investments?
When we talk about organizational training,
the first question that arises is
the way of its organization.
What should be the concentration of participants?
How best to conduct organizational training?
Individually.
That is, there are employees of the organization,
I release them from work,
and then invited specialists
to conduct group training.
How to make groups?
And which employees should be included?
One rank, different ranks, experienced,
beginners, is it worth mixing groups?
Will everyone be interested in this group?
Again, how much will it pay off?
Will the beginners be able to take that experience
and not miss the opportunity
to get a profit?
Will experienced managers look up to the beginners
and not consider it a waste of time
when they could implement the plan
and get a profit?
If we talk about the training of the organization in general,
what levels of employees should be trained?
We cannot, even with all the desire of everyone,
train all the employees,
we live in a very tough business environment.
Accordingly, if you achieve some results,
you need to continue to achieve and develop them,
because there are always those competitors
who come to us on our heels.
Again, how should the training be concentrated?
How to do it optimally?
From the point of view of the organization,
how to make it more efficient?
How to do it optimally from the point of view
of the budget economy and the result?
Everything is the same as we talked about
in the case of individual training,
only there was no such task,
there we sent employees.
We immediately build training within our organization.
The next problem that is connected with the same problems
that were in the case of individual training
is that people working in the organization
have different experiences,
have different motivations,
have different interests, have different tendencies.
So, is it worth organizing training levels?
How to distribute people at these levels?
How to make training at each level
contribute to the development of competence,
skills, knowledge, specialization,
so that they do not explain
what they already know,
what they already have,
but to identify and diagnose
what else to add to their skills
so that they become even more productive
and not only the company receives dividends
from this, but also the company
receives dividends from this.
Not only the company receives dividends and profits from this,
but also the employees themselves receive
moral and material satisfaction from this
in the form that the company invests in their training,
which means that the company is interested in them,
interested in their results,
and, accordingly, the company does not treat them
as a kind of screw to achieve its results.
The next problem of organizational training
that arises in this case
is a problem of a large number of obstacles
that arise from the point of view
of the productivity of learning.
The fact is that learning
significantly implies mastering new skills,
and here a very pinching problem arises.
An experienced manager who was sent to train,
who has completed this training,
can consider this training
as a dissatisfaction of the management,
its direct boss, with its results.
After all, if the management is satisfied
with these results, why am I being fired
from my job so that I study for God knows what?
The problem is very serious
because in any organization we work with living people,
with their ambitions,
with their expectations,
with their values.
Remember everything we talked about
when considering the approach of Bandura
and when considering the cognitive-ambivarial approach of Rotter.
People have motives,
people have aspirations,
people have clings, people have ambitions,
and it may turn out that the management
organizes this process with the best motivations,
with the best expectations,
and the employees perceive it
as distrust of themselves.
Moreover, they even begin to look for new jobs
where they seem to be in demand.
If we train what is called star managers
who are successful in their field,
then there is a problem of losing valuable personnel.
How to motivate people to study?
How to justify and how to offer
these or those forms of organizational interaction
so that people do not perceive it
as a dissatisfaction
or as a meaningless waste of time?
And, of course, the next problem
that arises is related to the fact
that organizational training is a very serious interference
in the functioning of the organization.
It is a very serious interference
in the organizational behavior
that we have discussed.
The fact is that there are certain relationships,
certain communications,
certain norms, certain traditions
that are considered to be self-evident in the organization.
There is no question of why they are like that.
It is accepted.
And suddenly, when organizational training is going on,
it becomes clear that it is not necessary
to talk about it.
Qualitative training is the training
that makes managers think about the prospects
of the development of their organization.
We will talk about this in more detail
in the next lecture.
So, the question arises,
why do we do it this way and not the other way around?
A lot of negative things
that exist in the organization
begin to be identified and recorded.
And there is a negative in any organization
simply because if there are a lot of people
working in the organization,
the employees are always dissatisfied with something.
Either with the salary,
or with the motivation, or with the relations.
And in this regard,
any interference
brings very dangerous and fraught moments.
And then the question arises,
the interference will still be there.
How to make it effective
and how to reduce it to zero?
All possible difficulties will arise.
They will arise for sure.
These are the main problems
that arise in the concept of organizational training.
If we read the literature
that is being published on this topic,
there are a lot of smaller problems.
There are specific examples
of the difficulties that arise in organizational training.
In this regard,
the question arises,
what arguments prevail
for the concept of organizational training?
If this form of training
becomes more and more popular
in foreign companies,
it is the best indicator
that the advantages that are obtained
are a significant argument
for the transition
from individual training
to organizational training.
But this is a qualitative change
that arises in relation to the organization,
to the staff,
and to the organization of all the types of training
that exist now.
What types of organizational training exist?
Types of training
differ in the goals and forms
that can be identified.
Of course, these types of training
are closely interlinked with individual training,
but when it comes to individual training,
to a large extent,
it is connected with the individual features
of one person, one employee,
one manager who works in the organization.
When we talk about organizational training,
there are any difficulties,
misunderstandings that arise
that are associated
with the problems arising in any organization.
Usually, there are three types of training.
The first type of training is adaptive training.
Its goal is to develop abilities,
develop skills,
develop competencies,
understand new situations
that may arise in business.
This is a preliminary,
prognostic training.
Business is constantly developing forward.
It is a constant change,
and you need to be ready for these changes.
If you are stagnant,
then, in fact,
you are talking about a very unfavorable perspective.
As for adaptive training,
from one point of view,
this is perhaps the most familiar form of training,
because we adapt each employee
to a new place,
to a new purpose,
to a new function,
to a new plan.
If we change some fundamental points,
enter a new market sphere,
strive to change the strategic conditions
of the organization's development,
we must prepare and adapt the organization's staff
to the new visions that are introduced in the organization.
In fact, adaptive training
is a necessary training
to successfully solve
and meet new requirements
that may arise.
Another type of training is generative training.
As for generative training,
in fact,
it is a training that requires
the development of the ability to look at your organization in a new way,
its prospects,
its place on the market,
its relationship with competitors.
In fact, it is a creative training.
In this case,
it is about changing some of the organizational systems,
some basic principles,
management systems.
This type of training, of course,
involves a preliminary,
very deep analysis.
Moreover, this analysis is not carried out
in a week, month, quarter.
It is a long-term, long-term,
and prospective analysis,
when certain approaches are found,
and some definitions are found,
and in the end we come up
with the whole set of views,
theological views,
relationship with a certain community
and that is the type of training
where, in particular,
from years of being active or active
And finally, the third type of training
is training in the workplace.
And in this case,
it is not only about adaptation and training of newbies,
that is, new employees who came to work
and who are put in positions.
Recently, training in the workplace
has become widespread from the point of view
of the development of the mentorship system.
These are employees who have worked for a long time
in the company, in the enterprise.
And, accordingly, these employees are,
in fact, living bearers,
living implementers of the history of the organization,
the tradition of the organization.
They have colossal experience,
they have the competencies that this organization needs,
and it is thanks to their competencies
that this organization has achieved
the achievements that it has been given.
Accordingly, these employees can pass
their truly invaluable,
here without any quotes,
experience to new employees.
Simply because they know best
what to pay attention to,
what to avoid,
what to do in case of emergency or other dangers.
As for mentorship,
it is precisely organizational training,
because each organization has its own problems,
each organization has its own tasks,
and only people who have worked
in the organization for a long time,
only people who have seen
the rise of the organization,
and who know the difficulties and difficulties,
can prevent negative actions
and develop and contribute
to those competencies that will help
solve the tasks facing this organization.
Business tasks.
In this regard,
since the 1980s,
the organization has been developing
and developing its own concept.
Many people are engaged in this topic today,
but the iconic figure in this regard
is Chris Argyris,
because it was Chris Argyris
who wrote the book
about the learning organization,
which, by the way,
was translated into English
and you can find it in the list of literature
that is attached to you.
And it was Chris Argyris
who drew attention to all those aspects
that we are talking about now
from the point of view of the learning organization
and the difference between individual learning
and learning organization.
Argyris came from the fact
that the fundamental value
has a reverse connection.
We do not need education for the sake of education.
As often happens,
there are certain standards
that for three or five years
it is necessary to undergo retraining,
level of improvement, qualifications, etc.
Moreover, this process is very often
connected with the fact
that you receive a diploma
without going to these classes
and, in fact, this is a vacation for you.
We do not need such education.
Argyris, since he was a representative
of a foreign business,
comes from the fact
that if an organization wants to develop,
wants to achieve new successful achievements,
and invests funds in education,
then this education should be profitable,
there should be investments.
In this regard,
he addresses the concept of reverse connection.
That is, there are certain goals
that the organization,
the leadership of the organization wants to achieve.
There are certain actions
that it takes to achieve these goals.
One of these actions is to build education in the organization.
Consequently,
these actions lead to some consequences,
some results.
But then you need to look
whether the results that the organization wants to get
correspond to what has really been achieved.
If it corresponds,
then we can admit that the organizational training was successful.
But this happens, unfortunately,
far from always.
Sometimes it turns out
that the results that the organization has received
lead to a discrepancy
with the original criteria
of the result that it would like to get.
In this regard,
the first reverse connection or so-called
ordinary loop of reverse connection arises.
As for English,
here it is more likely to translate as ordinary,
that is, a simple reverse connection.
We see that the desired result has not been achieved.
We need education
that contributes to the implementation
and solution of new tasks in front of the organization.
Accordingly, we need to invest funds
to ensure such a process of improvement
that will allow the organization's employees
to solve the tasks in front of them.
These are everyday tasks.
This is very important.
These are tasks that arise in front of them constantly,
that arise every day,
and that we solve daily.
This is an ordinary loop of learning,
an ordinary loop of reverse connection.
But!
And this is the loop
that is traditionally present
in the learning process,
which traditionally drew attention
to the concept of learning.
But!
Perhaps another situation.
We have some criteria for the final result.
The organization is learning,
some consequences appear,
but we see that the consequences
do not correspond to what we want.
We can go the old way,
that is, use the usual loop of double connection
and look for those specialists,
those providers who will teach
the momentary solution of the tasks that arise
and, accordingly,
will allow to solve the problems that arise.
But!
Perhaps another approach.
There is a discrepancy
between the criteria for the result
and the result that is obtained.
Then the question arises.
If this discrepancy
persistently continues to be realized
and persistently does not disappear,
maybe it is not in the competence of the employees,
maybe it is that
the organization structure itself
or the basic principles
of this organization are not in line with the criteria.
That is, it is necessary to set the organization
on the path of change.
According to Adgeris,
this is a double loop of feedback
or a complex feedback.
The unitary loop, the usual loop,
showed that the training is not successful.
Attempts to achieve the results of the training
do not lead to the desired results.
Then a problem arises.
Or maybe the organization has already exhausted
its basic principles,
its structure,
and it needs root transformations.
In this case,
we should talk about a complex
generative feedback
or a complex generative feedback.
Adgeris gives an interesting example
with a calorifer.
If we have a calorifer,
a heater,
and our task is to maintain
a temperature of 20 degrees Celsius
in the room or in the office.
We set this temperature on the calorifer
and it starts to work.
When the temperature reaches 20 degrees,
it turns off and, accordingly,
stops working and consumes energy.
When the temperature drops below 20 degrees,
it turns on and heats up
to 20 degrees of air temperature again.
This is what, according to Adgeris,
is a regular loop of feedback.
This is what is done
in all existing heating devices
that exist today.
They heat up the temperature
to a certain level that we set.
After that, they turn off,
save electricity.
When the temperature in the room
drops again, they turn on.
On the other hand,
there may be another task.
Should we turn on the calorifer?
Maybe we should improve
the window frames?
Maybe we should put in
other window frames?
Maybe there are other ways
to maintain a temperature of 20 degrees?
In this case, the question is,
do we really need this calorifer
that is able to heat up
the temperature to 20 degrees?
Maybe we need some basic transformations?
This is a loop of double communication.
When we don't just solve the problem
of increasing the temperature,
we turn on the calorifer,
and we turn off the calorifer.
If we want to optimize the structure of the work,
maybe we should buy two calorifers?
Maybe we should build partitions
inside the office
to improve the heating situation?
Maybe we should install thermal insulation materials?
The basic principles change here.
The task is to create comfortable working conditions.
Maybe we should create
a loop of complex or generative
conditions?
This is a loop of complex or generative
conditions.
From the point of view of Argyris,
organizational learning should
move to building complex
or double loops
according to its terminology.
I want to draw your attention to the fact
that a single loop is a regular learning.
It is the same as an individual learning.
I come to learn something,
then I pass the exams based on these exams,
I get a certain qualification,
I return to my workplace,
and then it turns out whether my new skills
are good or not.
The same is with an organization.
The organization starts to get
the desired results.
The loop of double communication
involves systemic changes.
It is a systematic approach.
It is what is well-known
in the business news
that we need a systematic approach.
We should consider an organization
as a system,
which is included in the system of other organizations,
which is included in the system of business,
which is included in the system of the market.
This is the interaction of systems.
An organization that learns is a beautiful organization
that exists in this system
and is able to change
even if it is necessary to change its basic principles
to get the desired result.
The concept of Argyris has received
a wide spread in the business environment.
More and more supporters
are becoming
to build training in learning organizations.
They have received the name
of learning organization.
As for learning organizations,
there are four main problems.
There are four main problems.
I would like to draw your attention
to the fact that the idea of Argyris
is almost modern.
It is the 1980s.
Argyris is constantly
modernizing its proposals.
There are already followers and opponents.
It is one of the possible systems.
It is one of the possible approaches to learning.
I don't want to say that this is how you should build training.
But you need to know the trends
that exist in the modern business environment.
The first problem is the organization
that pays attention to the changes
that are happening in it.
The organization that pays attention to the changes
What policy is implemented in these organizations?
The first and main task
is the desire to develop
the employees.
The first and main task
is the desire to develop the employees.
The organization is an abstraction.
The organization is a component of people
and relationships between people.
If we want to change the organization,
we must change people's worldview,
change their cognitive structures,
change their motivation,
change the models
from which they model their behavior.
change their motivation,
change the models
from which they model their behavior.
The second approach
is the development of large-scale learning programs.
The third approach
is the development of adaptation schools
and assessment centers.
In fact, it is the implementation of a system
of working with staff,
training and development of staff,
assessment and motivation of staff.
Because in learning organizations
we have to develop a strategic program.
It is not a program for a year or two.
It is a program for 3-5 years.
It is a program with business planning,
with calculations, financial investments
and the return expected.
The third point
that is usually considered in learning organizations
is the development of key skills and competencies
that are necessary for successful organization development.
It is a very important aspect.
It is necessary not only for the organization
to be successful now,
if it exists and has the means for training,
it means that it is still occupying its niche.
It is about the admiration of those skills,
of those competencies
that the organization may need
in order to reflect,
to respond to market challenges,
to be able to outrun competitors
and to hold the won positions.
The fourth,
the last aspect,
is the demand for new acquired skills.
We are back to the human.
People usually prefer to use
what they are already familiar with.
And in this regard,
they get a lot of new knowledge.
But here the question arises,
why this novelty?
Tomorrow, from Monday,
I will start to introduce new approaches.
tomorrow, from Monday,
But for now, let them work as usual.
They have come to the same excuses
that we talked about when discussing Bandura,
when discussing the concept of the Rotary,
that is, the organization that is not only
the one that builds the training program,
that develops each individual,
that reveals the promising skills and competencies,
but this is the organization
that fundamentally creates conditions
where these skills should be developed.
This is not always an easy step,
because the transition from one strategy of development
to another strategy of development
can be accompanied by a temporary decrease in the indicators,
a temporary retreat from the existing positions.
A temporary retreat from the existing positions.
You have to be ready for this.
There is nothing wrong with this.
If the situation is well analyzed,
if the situation is well calculated,
and if there is a strategy of development,
the learning organization is the one
that has a strategy of the future.
This is the organization that is not afraid
of the changes that will come.
These are the general approaches
that have been formed now,
that are used today
in terms of organizational learning.
Naturally, this is a new direction.
We needed much less time
compared to individual training
to understand this.
Let's see how much the material,
the knowledge that we have,
may be useful to you.
Let's do the tasks
that we will offer you now.
You will discuss the solutions
to the problem situations
that we have discussed
and the suggestions that you can give
to solve the cases that will be offered to you.
So, dear colleagues,
during our today's lesson
we have discussed the problems
of individual and organizational learning.
We have analyzed the approaches
to individual learning,
the behavioral, cognitive-behavioral,
and cognitive approaches.
We have considered the learning
of the approach of Chris Argyris
and the problems and tendencies
that are associated with the learning
of people in organizations.
We have analyzed the connections
between individual learning
and the learning of organizations
and have outlined the prospects
of learning development
and the strategic plan of organization development.
Because the learning of an organization
is built on this plan.
The tasks that we have discussed
give a general idea
of how to solve the problem
of learning in an organization.
You can get answers to specific questions
in the literature that is offered to you.